https://www.youtube.com/@KNuggies/streams

## Introduction

Born in 1990, Haskell is a functional programming language designed by a committee of experts to embody the following characteristics:

1. Purely Functional: Haskell is a purely functional language, meaning that all computations are performed using functions and function application. 
2. Call-by-Need (Lazy Evaluation): values are not computed until they are actually needed. This permits us to make infinite computations and infinite lists. 
3. Strong Polymorphic and Static Typing: every expression has a well-defined type that can be checked at compile time. It also has polymorphic typing, which allows you to write functions that can operate on values of any type as long as they meet certain requirements (type inference ... indeed usually we don´t need to explicitly declare types).



### Currying 

Currying is an important concept.
````Haskell
answerToEverything = 42

complexcalc x y z=x * y *  z * answerToEverything

:t complexcalc
complexcalc : : Integer -> Integer -> Integer -> Integer
complexcalc : : Integer-> (Integer -> (Integer -> Integer))
````

````Haskell
numbers =[1,3,5,7]
numbers !! 2  -> 5 
null numbers -> False --tell us if the list is empty
head numbers -> 1 
tail numbers -> [3,5,7]
init numbers -> [1,3,5]
last numbers -> 7 
drop 2 numbers -> [5,7]
take 2 numbers -> [1,3]
elem 5 numbers -> True 
````


### Case Expressions and Pattern Matching

Haskell has a powerful mechanism for defining custom data types called "algebraic data types". You should become familiar with how to define and use these types, as well as pattern matching.

````haskell 
first (x,_,_) = x
second (_,x,_) = x
third (_,_,z) = z
first (1,2,3) -> 1
second (1,2,3) -> 2
third (1,2,3) -> 3
````

The _ means the same thing as it does in list comprehensions. It means that we really don't care what that part is, so we just write a _.


### List Comprehensions and Arithmetic Sequences

If you've ever taken a course in mathematics, you've probably run into _set comprehensions_. They're normally used for building more specific sets out of general sets. A basic comprehension for a set that contains the first ten even natural numbers is $S = \{ 2 \cdot x | x \in \mathbb{N} , x \le 10 \}$ The part before the pipe is called the output function, x is the variable, N is the input set and x <= 10 is the predicate. That means that the set contains the doubles of all natural numbers that satisfy the predicate.   

```<-``` is used to 'bound' elements in the list comprehensions. 

```length' xs = sum [1 | _ <- xs]``` 

fi xs = [x | x <- xs, odd x == False]


A cool function that produces a list of pairs: zip. It takes two lists and then zips them together into one list by joining the matching elements into pairs. It's a really simple function but it has loads of uses. It's especially useful for when you want to combine two lists in a way or traverse two lists simultaneously. Here's a demonstration.

````Haskell
zip [1,2,3,4,5] [5,5,5,5,5]  -- [(1,5),(2,5),(3,5),(4,5),(5,5)]  
zip [1 .. 5] ["one", "two", "three", "four", "five"]  -- [(1,"one"),(2,"two"),(3,"three"),(4,"four"),(5,"five")]
````


In haskell the lists must be homogeneous.

## Types

difference between ```data``` and ```type``` ? The ```type``` keyboard is not a new data type but just an **alias** . 

```newtype``` is 'weird' in since we want to make an alias 'basically identical' to another already define ```type``` but I want to say to ghc to consider them two different types.
````Haskell
sum' :: Num a => [a] -> a
sum' = foldr (+) 0
````

Recursive types

````Haskell
let x = 3
y = 12
in x+y -- => 15

--or 
let {x = 3 ; y = 12} in x+y
````

fold-left 

note: in Racket it is defined with (f x z)

In Scheme fold left is more efficient (tail recursive) while fold right uses stack in Haskell this is not true. 

Canonical operator to force evaluation is ```seq :: a -> t -> t``` . 

````Haskell
foldl ’ f z [] = z --this is to forcing the evaluation 

($!) :: (a -> b) -> a -> b --another way to force .. "function application"
````


There is a convenient strict variant of $ (function application) called $!


The code `foldl (\acc x -> x + acc) 0 [1,2,3]` is an example of using the `foldl` function to perform a left-associative fold (also known as a "reduce" operation) on a list. The lambda expression `\acc x -> x + acc` is the binary function that's being applied to the elements of the list. The first argument to `foldl` is the binary function, and the second argument is the initial accumulator value.

The reason for using the `\` (backslash) symbol is because it is used to define anonymous functions (also known as lambda expressions) in Haskell. The `\` symbol is followed by one or more arguments, and then an expression that's to be evaluated given those arguments. In this case, the lambda expression `\acc x -> x + acc` takes two arguments `acc` and `x`, and the expression `x + acc` is evaluated for each element of the list.

The `foldl` function works by iterating through the list from left to right, and applying the binary function to each element along with the current accumulator value. The result of each application is then used as the accumulator value for the next iteration. In this case, `foldl` starts with the initial accumulator value of 0, and then applies the binary function to each element of the list, successively adding each element to the accumulator value.


ghci> foldl (\z1 x -> x + z1) 0 [1,2,3]
6

Yes, you can specify multiple arguments in the lambda expression of `foldl`. For example:

````haskell
foldl (\acc (x, y) -> x + y + acc) 0 [(1, 2), (3, 4), (5, 6)]
````

```Haskell
showAPiece :: Show a => [a] -> [Char]
showAPiece [] = ""
showAPiece (x:xs) = show x ++ "|" ++ show xs 

ghci> showAPiece [1,2,3]
"1|[2,3]"
```

The type constraint "Show a =>" in the type signature of the function `showAPiece` means that the type `a` must be an instance of the `Show` type class.

This means that the function `show` can be called on values of type `a`. The `Show` type class is used to define how values of a given type should be displayed as a string.

By adding the constraint " Show a =>", you are telling the compiler that you need to be able to display values of type `a` as strings, and you are using the `show` function to do this. This allows the compiler to ensure that you are only using the `showAPiece` function with types that have a defined `Show` instance.


--- 


Try to make Fibonacci function 


Read is sort of the opposite typeclass of Show. The read function takes a string and returns a type which is a member of Read. 


````Haskell
1.  ghci> read "4"  
2.  <interactive>:1:0:  
3.      Ambiguous type variable `a' in the constraint:  
4.        `Read a' arising from a use of `read' at <interactive>:1:0-7  
5.      Probable fix: add a type signature that fixes these type variable(s)  
````

What GHCI is telling us here is that it doesn't know what we want in return. Notice that in the previous uses of read we did something with the result afterwards. That way, GHCI could infer what kind of result we wanted out of our read. If we used it as a boolean, it knew it had to return a Bool. But now, it knows we want some type that is part of the Read class, it just doesn't know which one. Let's take a look at the type signature of read.

````Haskell
1.  ghci> :t read  
2.  read :: (Read a) => String -> a  
````

See? It returns a type that's part of Read but if we don't try to use it in some way later, it has no way of knowing which type. That's why we can use explicit _type annotations_. Type annotations are a way of explicitly saying what the type of an expression should be. We do that by adding :: at the end of the expression and then specifying a type. Observe:



> it seems that GHCI knows how to read inferring the type of ```a``` looking the type of the operations it's in. 


Enum members are sequentially ordered types — they can be enumerated. The main advantage of the Enum typeclass is that we can use its types in list ranges. They also have defined successors and predecesors, which you can get with the succ and pred functions.



### Polymorphic Types ?? 

### User-Defined Types  ?? 

### Recursive Types ??


type keyword is used to make synonims ... basically for readability . 

````Haskell
map  (1 +)  [1,2,3]
````




tail is cdr 
while head is car 


bot is 'never ending computation' and all errors have value bot

### Strings

### Let and where

### Forcing evaluation

Canonical operator to force evaluation is seq



## Type Classes

When you want to define a new type you use data. 

A type is a set of values. A type-class is a set of types. 
A type-class is a way to define operations to other types ... very similar to interfaces in for example Java. 

type classes are the mechanism provided by Haskell for ad hoc polymorphism.

type classes are used for overloading: a class is a "container" of overloaded
operations
we can declare a type to be an instance of a type class, meaning that it implements its operations
an implementation of (\=\=) is called a method

$$\begin{array}{|c|c|}
\hline \hline 
\text { Haskell } & \text { Java } \\
\hline \text { Type Class } & \text { Interface } \\
\hline \text { Type } & \text { Class } \\
\hline \text { Value } & \text { Object } \\
\hline \text { Method } & \text { Method } 
\end{array} $$



type classes 

a type is a set/domain of values. 

members of type class num have for example defined a ```+``` so all they have that operation.

Haskell always try to keep generic variables. 

this is called functions constraints. 

Language that I used (from most to less):


Pattern matching 

one definition of some complex function and then many lines that described the function 

type classes are used for overloading: a class is a "container" of overloaded operations. "ord and eq are type classes".

### Equality 


### Show



### Ord

we can also extend Eq with comparison operations:
class (Eq a) => Ord a
(<), (<=), (>=), (>)
max, min
where
:: a -> a -> Bool
:: a -> a -> a
3Ord is also called a subclass of Eq


### The Enumeration Class



usually it is not necessary to explicitly define instances of some classes. Haskell can be quite smart and do it automatically, by using deriving. 

````Haskell
data Point = Point Float Float deriving (Show,Eq)
````


Enumeration: 

````Haskell
data RPS = Rock | Paper | Scissors deriving (Show, Eq)

instance Ord RPS where
x <= y | x == y = True
Rock <= Paper = True
Paper <= Scissors = True
Scissors <= Rock = True
_ <= _ = False

````




### The Newtype Declaration

### Defining Instances

## Road to Monads

Here is a high-level summary of the steps to reach Monads. Each step builds on the previous ones, adding new functionality and allowing for more complex computations. Monads are the most powerful of these type classes, and they are used for dealing with side effects like error handling or state management.

- **Foldable**: A type class that enables folding over data structures, such as lists or trees.
- **Maybe**: A data type that represents values with an additional "nothing" value, which can be used to handle errors or missing values.
- **Functor**: A type class that defines a way to apply a function over a structure, preserving the structure's type.
- **Applicative Functors**: A type class that extends the Functor class to allow for sequential application of functions over multiple structures, with the ability to lift functions of multiple arguments into the context of the structures.
- **Monad**: A type class that extends the Applicative Functor class to enable sequencing of actions or computations, with the ability to chain together actions that may produce values, handle errors, or make decisions based on the results of previous actions.

Actually it's not necessary to implement all these steps to have a Monad, but understanding the concepts behind each step helps in understanding monads better. Start simple and gradually add abstractions as needed.

### Foldable 

- Foldable is a class used for folding.
- The main idea is the same as `foldl` and `foldr` for lists:
    -   Given a container and a binary operation `f`, we want to apply `f` to all elements in the container.
- A minimal implementation of Foldable requires `foldr`.


````Haskell 

data Tree a = Empty | Leaf a | Node (Tree a) (Tree a)

tfoldr f z Empty = z
tfoldr f z (Leaf x) = f x z
tfoldr f z (Node l r) = tfoldr f (tfoldr f z r) l

instance Foldable Tree where
foldr = tfoldr

> foldr (+) 0 (Node (Node (Leaf 1) (Leaf 3)) (Leaf 5))
9

````



````Haskell
sum' xs = foldl (\acc x -> acc + x) 0 xs 
````

where ```\acc x -> acc + x``` is the binary function and 0 is the starting value. 

foldl => the list is 'consumed' up from the left side. 

I'm sure you all know that elem checks whether a value is part of a list so I won't go into that again

````Haskell
isThere y ys = foldl (\acc x -> if x == y then True else acc) False ys
````

The right fold, foldr works in a similar way to the left fold, only the accumulator eats up the values from the right.

Foldl can be expressed in term of foldr (id is the identity function):
````Haskell
foldl f a bs = foldr (\b g x -> g (f x b))
````

id bs a
the converse is not true, since foldr may work on infinite lists, unlike foldl:
in the presence of call-by-need evaluation, foldr will immediately return the
application of f to the recursive case of folding over the rest of the list
if f is able to produce some part of its result without reference to the recursive
case, then the recursion will stop
on the other hand, foldl will immediately call itself with new parameters until
it reaches the end of the list.

foldr works with infinite data structures, foldl nope. 

the concept is that foldl starts from left to right but actually it starts to compute the recurrence from the last element (but if it doesn't exists .. that's not possible). 

### Maybe 

Maybe is used to represent computations that may fail: we either have
data Maybe a = Nothing | Just a

It is adopted in many recent languages, to avoid NULL and limit exceptions
usage: mainly because exceptions are sometimes complex to manage. 

### Functor 

Functor is the class of all the types that offer a map operation 

Generally it s natural to make every data structure an instance of functor. 

- ```fmap id = id``` (where id is the identity function)
- ```fmap (f.g) = (fmap (f)).(fmap (g))``` (homomorphism)

````Haskell
tmap f (Leaf x) = Leaf $ f x
````

### Applicative Functors 

````Haskell
class (Functor f) => Applicative f where
pure :: a -> f a
(<*>) :: f (a -> b) -> f a -> f b -- <*> means  apply 
````

````Haskell
concat [[1,2],[3],[4,5]] 
[1,2,3,4,5] 

ghci> concatMap (\x -> [x, x+1]) [1,2,3] 
[1,2,2,3,3,4]

ghci> concatMap (++"?") ["a","b","c"]
"a?b?c?"

ghci> concatMap (++"") ["a","b","c"]
"abc"

ghci> concatMap (return "a") ["a","b","c"]
"aaa"


-- with concatMap, we get the standard implementation of <*> (the main op of applicative)

ghci> [(+1),(*2)] <*> [1,2,3]
[2,3,4,2,4,6] 

````


foldable is some kind of data structure providing fold operations

functor is a data structure providing the map operations 

applicative are similar to a functor but we apply a 'container' of functions

ghci> z = Node (Leaf (*3)) (Leaf (*2))
ghci> y = Node (Leaf 2) (Leaf 1)
ghci> z <*> y
[[(6)(3)][(4)(2)]]



### Monad 

introduced by Eugenio Moggi in 1991, a monad is a kind of algebraic data
type used to represent computations (instead of data in the domain model) -
we will often call these computations actions . 


If you are definining Applicative after Functor be consistent!! 


Monad: 

return = pure 
and then you made pattern matching for each possible combination


:t (>>=)
Monad m => m a -> (a -> m b) -> m b 

The implementation with monad permits me to perform 
specific operations with ==> and with "do notation"

Note that do is a "syntax sugar"


The "do notation" in Haskell is considered a syntax sugar because it provides a more readable and convenient way of writing Monadic code. "Do notation" takes the form of a series of statements separated by "bind" operations represented by the <- symbol. Behind the scenes, the "do notation" is translated into chains of bind operations (also known as "flatMap" or "bind" in other functional programming languages) which have a more complex syntax and can be harder to read. The use of the "do notation" makes it easier to write code that is easier to read, understand, and maintain, while still having the same underlying behavior as the equivalent code written using only bind operations.



Additionally, using "if" statements in functional programming is generally discouraged, as functions should avoid side effects and return values based on their inputs, not on conditions.

monads allow the programmer to chain actions together to build an ordered
sequence, in which each action is decorated with additional processing
rules provided by the monad and performed automatically 

monads are flexible and abstract. This makes some of their applications a
bit hard to understand.

monads can also be used to make imperative programming easier in a pure
functional language 

Monad is a subclass of Applicative . 

The monad is just a way to composing your actions and computations. 


-- Sequentially compose two actions, passing any value produced
-- by the first as an argument to the second.
(>>=)
:: m a -> (a -> m b) -> m b

-- Sequentially compose two actions, discarding any value produced
-- by the first, like sequencing operators (such as the semicolon)
-- in imperative languages.
(>>)

bind is a way to compose computations making a sequence of actions. 

1) return is the identity element:
(return x) >>= f <=> f x
m >>= return <=> m
2) associativity for binds:
(m >>= f) >>= g <=> m >>= (\x -> (f x >>= g))



We couldn't have achieved this by just using Maybe as an applicative. If you try it, you'll get stuck, because applicative functors don't allow for the applicative values to interact with each other very much. They can, at best, be used as parameters to a function by using the applicative style. The applicative operators will fetch their results and feed them to the function in a manner appropriate for each applicative and then put the final applicative value together, but there isn't that much interaction going on between them. Here, however, each step relies on the previous one's result. On every landing, the possible result from the previous one is examined and the pole is checked for balance. This determines whether the landing will succeed or fail.


A value of type Maybe a represents a value of type a with the context of possible failure attached. A value of Just "dharma" means that the string "dharma" is there whereas a value of Nothing represents its absence, or if you look at the string as the result of a computation, it means that the computation has failed.

allows us to feed a monadic value to a function that takes a normal one.

Converting this monstrosity into a neat chain of monadic applications with >>= is a classic example of how the Maybe monad saves us a lot of time when we have to successively do computations that are based on computations that might have failed.


Monads in Haskell are so useful that they got their own special syntax called do notation. We've already encountered do notation when we were doing I/O and there we said that it was for gluing together several I/O actions into one. Well, as it turns out, do notation isn't just for IO, but can be used for any monad. Its principle is still the same: gluing together monadic values in sequence. We're going to take a look at how do notation works and why it's useful.

````Haskell
ghci> show [1,13..100] 
[1,13,25,37,49,61,73,85,97]
-- [x,k..u] is a a list with upper bound "u" and a step of "x-k"  
````


Monads are a way of structuring computations, and provide a way to wrap values with additional context. They are used to provide a way to sequence computations and manage side effects, such as input/output or error handling.


```(>>=)```  sequentially compose two actions, discarding any value produced by the first, like sequencing operators in imperative languages. 

The do syntax is used to avoid the explicit use of ```(>>=)```  , this is like the begin structure in [00.Scheme](00.Scheme.md) . 

````Haskell
instance Monad  Maybe where: 
(Just x) >>= k            -- k x  
Nothing  >>= _           --Nothing 
fail _                           --Nothing   
````


The list Monad is the foundation of list comprehension. 
A monad is just an operation which gives the possibility of compose monadic actions one after the other. What is a monadic action? That actually depends on how you define your monad. 


In Haskell, a monad is a way to structure computations. It is a way to define a sequence of steps that can be combined and reused. Monads are used to abstract away common patterns in code, making it easier to write and understand complex programs. A monad is a type of abstract data type that has a specific set of operations defined for it, such as bind and return. These operations allow you to combine monads and create new ones, making it easier to write programs in a functional style.

---


Instead of doing the `>==` concatenation .. just do "do" thing. 





--- 

In Haskell, you can make an instance of Applicative for a certain data type by defining how the Applicative's `pure` and `<*>` functions should behave for that type. Here is an example of how you might make an instance of Applicative for the `Maybe` data type:

````Haskell
instance Applicative Maybe where
  pure = Just
  Nothing <*> _ = Nothing
  _ <*> Nothing = Nothing
  Just f <*> Just x = Just (f x)
  ````

In this instance, the `pure` function simply wraps a value in a `Just` constructor, while the `<*>` function handles the different possible combinations of `Just` and `Nothing` values. This allows you to use Applicative methods, such as `<$>` and `<*>`, with `Maybe` values.

Overall, making an instance of Applicative for a certain data type in Haskell involves defining the behavior of the `pure` and `<*>` functions for that type. This allows you to use Applicative methods with values of that type.




### The State Monad



We can do IO with it. We now define a general monad to do it: btw it is already available in the libraries ```Control.Monad.State```. 
First of all, we define a type to represent our state:
The idea is having a type that represent a computation with a state.  


## IO

IO is not 'compatible' with the functional philosophy. 
In general, IO computation is based on state change (e.g. of a file), hence if
we perform a sequence of operations, they must be performed in order
(and this is not easy with call-by-need)

````Haskell
getChar :: Time -> Char. 
````

can be seen as a function  indeed, it is an IO action (in this case for Input):

````Haskell
getChar :: IO Char
````

quite naturally, to print a character we use ```putChar``` that has type:

````Haskell 
putChar :: Char -> IO ()
````

```IO``` is an instance of the monad class, and in Haskell it is considered as an indelible stain of impurity.

main is the default entry point of the program
````Haskell
main = do { --sequence of IO actions
putStr "Please, tell me something>";
thing <- getLine; --a way to get the input
putStrLn $ "You told me \"" ++ thing ++ "\".";
}
````
 
````Haskell
import System.IO
import System.Environment

readfile = do {
args <- getArgs; -- command line arguments
handle <- openFile (head args) ReadMode;
contents <- hGetContents handle; -- note: lazy
putStr contents;
hClose handle;
}

main = readfile
````


## Modules

Haskell has a simple module system, with import, export and namespaces

modules provide the only way to build abstract data types (ADT)
the characteristic feature of an ADT is that the representation type is hidden:
all operations on the ADT are done at an abstract level which does not
depend on the representation

````Haskell
module TreeADT (Tree , leaf , branch , cell ,
							left , right , isLeaf ) where
data Tree a = Leaf a | Branch ( Tree a) ( Tree a)
leaf = Leaf
branch = Branch
cell ( Leaf a) = a
left ( Branch l r) = l
right ( Branch l r) = r
isLeaf ( Leaf _) = True
isLeaf _ = False
````

in the export list the type name Tree appears without its constructors
so the only way to build or take apart trees outside of the module is by using
the various (abstract) operations
the advantage of this information hiding is that at a later time we could
change the representation type without affecting users of the type

### Qualified Names

### Abstract Data Types

### More Features


## Arrays

### Index types

### Array Creation

### Accumulation

### Incremental updates

### An example: Matrix Multiplication



## Links

[Starting Out - Learn You a Haskell for Great Good!](http://learnyouahaskell.com/starting-out#babys-first-functions) <- bel sito 
[Haskell Online Compiler & Interpreter - Replit](https://replit.com/languages/haskell) 

[impara haskell e mettilo da parte](../../../../../kb/impara%20haskell%20e%20mettilo%20da%20parte.md) 

-   Haskell
    
    -   [Learn you a Haskell...](http://learnyouahaskell.com/chapters)
    -   [Real World Haskell](http://book.realworldhaskell.org/)
    -   Suggested implementation: [The Glorious Glasgow Haskell Compiler](http://www.haskell.org/ghc/)
    -   [Standard](http://www.haskell.org/haskellwiki/Language_and_library_specification)
    -   [A gentle introduction to Haskell](http://www.haskell.org/tutorial/)
    -   [Haskell Cheatsheet](http://cheatsheet.codeslower.com/)
    -   [All about monads](http://www.haskell.org/haskellwiki/All_about_monads) (§)


[A Fistful of Monads - Learn You a Haskell for Great Good!](http://learnyouahaskell.com/a-fistful-of-monads#getting-our-feet-wet-with-maybe)

[Haskell/Indentation - Wikibooks, open books for an open world](https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Haskell/Indentation)

[haskell - What are the benefits of currying? - Stack Overflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/12413495/what-are-the-benefits-of-currying)

[Currying - HaskellWiki](https://wiki.haskell.org/Currying)

[Haskell (linguaggio) - Wikipedia](https://it.wikipedia.org/wiki/Haskell_(linguaggio)#Algoritmo_di_ordinamento_generico_quicksort)


# Notes 

ghci> head [1,2,3]
1
ghci> tail [1,2,3]
[2,3]
ghci> 
ghci> 

`(1,2,3)` in Haskell is a tuple, while `[1,2,3]` is a list.

A tuple is a fixed-length, ordered collection of elements. Tuples in Haskell can have different lengths and different types of elements. For example, `(1, "Hello", 3.14)` is a valid tuple in Haskell.

Lists, on the other hand, are ordered collections of elements that are all of the same type. Lists are homogeneous, whereas tuples are heterogeneous. Lists in Haskell are represented by square brackets `[]` and the elements are separated by commas.

In summary, tuples and lists are two different data structures in Haskell, with different properties and uses. Tuples are useful for when you want to group together a fixed number of elements that may have different types, while lists are useful for when you want to store a sequence of elements that are all of the same type.

ghci> 1 : [2]
[1,2]

ghci> 1 : [2]
[1,2]

ghci> [1,2,3] !! 2
3

Dollar function is to avoid "immediate" evaluation and it's generally used to avoid to use a lot of parenthesis . 




In Haskell, `data` and `type` are both used to define new data structures, but they have different purposes:

-   `data` is used to define a new algebraic data type, which is a composite data structure made up of several data constructors that define its different possible forms. For example, you could use `data` to define a new data type for binary trees:


`data Tree a = Empty | Node a (Tree a) (Tree a)`

-   `type` is used to define type synonyms, which are alternative names for existing types. For example, you could use `type` to define a synonym for a list of integers:


`type IntList = [Int]`

In short, `data` is used to create new data structures, while `type` is used to give existing types new names.

ghci> "(" ++ "3" 
"(3"