
# Web security 

The basic structure of a web app or website is based on HTTP(S) protocol. 
It's very important in this context to filter and validate client input carefully. Client is not always cooperative and may try to manipulate requests. Developers should not overlook this, since the client is the only part of the software that the attacker can use. 
It's common to assume that all the clients are attackers. 

## XSS - Cross Site Scripting

We can call XSS any stuff that can be exploited by the attacker to inject into a web page a script. There are three types from an higher point of view:

- **Stored XSS**: the attacker input is stored on the target server's database. This happens if the malicious code is not filtered out. 
- **Reflected XSS**: the malicious code is not stored on the server, it is simply in a response of the attacker to the users. This case it's different from the previous since it's necessary to fool the user in order to successfully complete the attack.
- **DOM-based XSS**: basically the previous one ... the only big difference is that the attack remains in the user's browser and the server doesn't see anything. 

TO FIX : 

Reflected XSS: We can append a parameter and a JavaScript script to a URL through a GET request. If the input is not sanitized, this can be dangerous because the script will be used as a parameter and can trigger an error page or load a generic page that includes the injected script. Since nothing is stored on the server, it is called reflected XSS


### XSS bypasses Same Origin Policy 

**SOP** is a paradigm which is based on the rule: 

> "all client-side code (e.g., JavaScript) loaded from origin **A** should only be able to access data from origin **A**"

where an origin is identified by the tuple: `<PROTOCOL,HOST,PORT`. It's easy to see that XSS bypass this simple rule and also in nowadays it's not rare that applications permits to share resources to enhance services. 
A solution could be to blackilist everything that may be misinterpreted but it's not a good approach. 

### CSP

**CSP3** (Content Security Policy) is the most valid defensive measure to mitigate XSS. It's a set of directives sent by the server to the client in the form of HTTP response headers which specifies what should be trusted and what shouldn't.
Many directives can be implemented, examples: 

- `script-src` load client code only from listed origins
- `form-action` lists valid endpoints for submission
- `frame-ancestors` lists sources that can embed the current page as frames and applets
- `img-src` defines the origins from which images can be loaded
- `style-src` as `script-src` but for stylesheets

CSP in theory is effective against XSS, but since the policies are written manually by devs and they must be to keep updated, they often are not effective to mitigate such attacks. 

## SQL Injection 

SQL injections can happen every time the input fields are not-sanitized input in web forms. Closing a string with the caracter `'` or the query injecting `;`, as well as commenting ( `--`) or using operators such as `UNION` and `INTERSECTION` can be exploited to bypass password checking or completely bypass the query system. 
Examples: 

````sql
SELECT name, phone, address FROM Users
WHERE Id='userinput'; 
````

can become: 

````sql
SELECT name, phone,address FROM Users
WHERE Id='' or '1'='1' ;--';
````
injecting `' or '1'='1' ;--` . 
Also `UNION` operator permits to concatenate the output of multiple queries, even a query on a different table from the original one. 

**SQL injection prevention**:

- properly sanitize input
- **not** build queries by string concatenation but using alternatives way 
- limit query privileges to limit damages 

## Cookies

The basic idea behind cookies is that the server stores small text file (a cookie) on user's browser which help to recognizes users when they visit website again but can also be used to track the same user across multiple websites. The cookie is also used to store sessions to avoid repeated logins, and this last aspect it's also a dangerous point of attack. 


### Cross-Site Request Forgery (CSRF)

Cross-Site Request Forgery (CSRF)

