
# List of all analyzed LP problems

## Transportation problem

This LP problem involves finding the optimal way to distribute a product from a set of sources to a set of destinations at the lowest cost.

## Diet optimization 

This is a classic LP problem that involves finding the optimal combination of foods to eat in order to meet certain nutritional requirements at the lowest cost.

## Packet routing 

With $a_i$ the capacity consumed by $i-$th packet , $c_{i1}$ cost consumed by the $i-$th packet on link 1, $k_1$ and $k_2$ the constraints on each link and $x_i$ decision variables.


$$\begin{array}{cl}
\text{min} \space \sum_{i \in I} c_{i 1} x_i+c_{i 2}\left(1-x_i\right) & \text { (cost) } \\
\sum_{i \in I} a_i x_i \leq k_1 & \text { (capacity 1) } \\
\sum_{i \in I} a_i\left(1-x_i\right) \leq k_2 & \text { (capacity 2) } \\
\quad x_i \in\{0,1\}, i \in I & \text { (binary variables) }
\end{array}$$

We can also 'expand' this formulation obviously for many links. In that case the decision variables will be $x_{ij}$ : set to 1 if packet $i-$th is sent over $j-$th link. 
Also remember to explicit the constraint: $\sum_ j ^ {\text{\# links}} x_ij = 1$ which in case of 2 links was kept 'implicit'.



    The Assignment Problem: This LP problem involves finding the optimal assignment of workers to tasks, in order to minimize the total cost of the assignments.
    
4.  The Production Planning Problem: This LP problem involves finding the optimal production levels of different products in order to maximize profits or minimize costs.
    
5.  The Portfolio Optimization Problem: This LP problem involves finding the optimal allocation of assets in a portfolio in order to maximize returns or minimize risk.
    
6.  The Resource Allocation Problem: This LP problem involves finding the optimal allocation of resources (such as time, money, or materials) to different activities in order to maximize some objective.
    
## The Facility Location Problem 

This LP problem involves finding the optimal location for a facility (such as a factory or warehouse) in order to minimize costs or maximize profits.
    
## The Knapsack Problem

This LP problem involves finding the optimal selection of items to include in a knapsack, in order to maximize the total value of the items while staying within the knapsack's weight limit.

## Travel salesman 


## DNA sequence 

To store a large set of strings, such as DNA sequences, we can use compact storage for similar sequences. The problem is to store many similar entries in a compact way, assuming the strings are binary. We can compute the [Hamming distance](../../../BSc(italian)/Reti%20Logiche/src/01.Sintesi%20reti%20combinatorie.md###Distanza%20di%20Hamming) between each pair of sequences (number of bits that need to be flipped to obtain the other sequence) to satisfy the properties of a distance function. Indeed distance hamming satisfies the three usual properties of a distance: nonnegativity, symmetry and triangle inequality. 
In order to exploit redundancies between sequences and to save memory, we can store only one of the sequences and then construct a complete graph $G$ with a node for each  difference. The problem of deciding which differences to memorize, so as to minimize the total number of bits used for storage, can be reduced to the problem of finding a **minimum-cost spanning tree in an appropriate graph**: only one sequence is completely stored, the spanning tree will be connected so that is possible to retrieve any sequence. 
