# Python Labs

We use Jupyter Notebook e il package per python di MIP. https://www.python-mip.com/ # (Mixed-Integer Linear Programming). 

Some standard stuff to modelling the problem: 

````Python
pip install mip 
import mip

# Define a model
model = mip.Model()

# Define variables
# In this case we specify the name: 
x = [model.add_var(name=i) for i in I] 

# but we can also specify the lower bound for example: 
x = [model.add_var(lb=0) for j in J]

# Define the objective function
model.objective = mip.minimize(...) 
#or 
model.objective = mip.maximise(...) 

# Define constraints
for i in I: #just example for 
    for j in J: #just example for 
        model.add_constr(mip.xsum(x[str(i), j]))
````

Generally inside the ```mip.minimize``` or ```mip.maximise``` we use ```mip.xsum(terms)``` where ```terms``` are the variables defined before.  
Note that you can use the Python function ```sum()``` but ```mip.xsum(terms)``` function is optimized version for quickly generating the linear expression when using ```mip```.

Then other simple things: 

````Python
# Optimizing command
model.optimize()

# Optimal objective function value
model.objective.x

# Printing the variables values
for i in model.vars:
	print(i.name, i.x)
````


Sensitivity analysis 

This information is returned back to us with the **dual variables** of the original problem. These give the unitary change in objective function due to a change in the right-hand side in each constraint.
````Python 
print(model.constrs[3].pi);
````

The value amounts to the shadow price for the demand constraint for product A1, i.e., to 3.7. By decreasing the demand by 10 square meters, the company loses 37 Euro.


**Which is the maximum amount of money that the company would invest in advertising, so as to increase the demand of A3 by 100 square meters?**

````Python 
print("Dual value:", model.constrs[2].pi)
````

he value amounts to the shadow price for the demand constraint for product A3, i.e., to 10.5455. The maximum amount of money that the company would invest to increase by 100 square meters the demand for A3 amounts to 1054.55 Euro

https://python-mip.readthedocs.io/en/latest/classes.html

_property_ `pi`

Value for the dual variable of this constraint in the optimal solution of a linear programming [`Model`](https://python-mip.readthedocs.io/en/latest/classes.html#mip.Model "mip.Model"). Only available if a pure linear programming problem was solved (only continuous variables).


The dual variables are calculated as part of the process of finding the optimal solution to a linear programming model. They are used to determine how much the objective function would change if the right-hand side value of a constraint were increased by a small amount.

In general, the dual variables of a linear programming model can be used to understand how the objective function is affected by changes to the right-hand side values of the constraints. They can also be used to derive pricing information for products or resources in the context of economic models.

**Which is the maximum price that the company would pay to have one extra production day per month?** 

For example in this case we take the constraint over the production days and we use the value for the dual variable of this constrain to know it. 

**The dual variable for a constraint would tell us how much the objective function value would change if the right-hand side value of the constraint were increased by a small amount.** 


it' s the Optimal valve of the Dual Variable

Perturbare the righ-side of the constraints makes sense only on the active constraints. 