What is a BNF grammar? 


# Free grammars

Regular expressions can provide lists but not nesting (recursion). 
 $$G =<V,\Sigma,P,S>$$
 where:
 - $V$ is the set of non terminals symbols
 - $\Sigma$ is the set of terminals symbols
 - $P$ is the set of productions 
 - $S$ is the axiom, a particular symbol of $V$ 


Recursion is the key to create infinite grammars. The necessary and sufficient condition for a grammar to be infinite is that there is a recursive derivation. Note that a grammar have a recursive derivations iff the corrisponding graph has a circuit. 

Clean grammars are grammars without a circular axioms. 

Syntax tree. 

Given a grammar $G$ and a string in $L(G)$ we can build a syntax tree of the string where the root is the axiom $S$, the leafs are the sequence of the symbols of the string and all the branches are the productions used to generate the string. 


With the definition of Syntax Tree we can also specify what is an ambiguity in the context of grammars.
A sentence is ambiguous if it admits different syntax trees. The number of distinct trees is also the degree of the ambiguity.

> Avoid the ambiguity in the grammar design phase. 

Ambiguity can be caused by bilateral recursion


Two possible algorithms to build syntax trees: 

- ELL: top-bottom 
- ELR: bottom-up 

# Machine net 

Machine net is an alternative way to show the rules of the grammar. 

ILL and ILR different way to build a parser. 

ILR recognize longest prefix and then match one of the machine nets. And then makes a reduction. 

First of all initial state. A closure is the set of all candidates that can be find starting from the init state and ''looking ahead''. Candidate is a way that ILR uses to verify the match is correct. 

A state can have more candidates. ILR looks multiple candidates in parallel. $C=<q,r>$ where $q$ is a state . A closure is all possible candidates of a given states. 

ILR uses ''lookahead'' symbols, which guarantee that the match is correct. 

1) you make closure to create initial state
2) while you have a state unleft to process, for each symbols inside the set of terminal/non terminal characters, if we have a transition that goes from one of the states in the ''macrostate" then we create a new transition and a new state. And the items of the new state are the closure of the original candidates but ''advanced''. 
3) we reapeat this process until we finish states


A language is ELR-1 iff: 

- no left-most recursion : no machine where the init state has no terminals transitions 
- the pilot is STP (single transition property): there is only "destination candidate" foreach transition 
- no conflicts: there are 3 types of conflict:
	- reduce-reduce conflict: conflict when same lookahead symbol for different productions 
	- shift-reduce conflict: transition to another state with a character $x$ and there is also a final state with lookahead $x$ . "the pilot can't know if it has finished or not". 
	- convergence conflict: multiple transitions reach same state with different lookahead.  